---
author: Craig Helmann
title: "Transit Boardings Are At All-Time Levels and Keep on Climbing."
image: /images/2015/boardings.png
excerpt: "Region-wide transit ridership has grown steadily since 2010 and
	exceeded 185 million annual boardings in 2014. Transit boardings have exceeded pre-recession levels despite fewer service hours in 2014 than 2010."

tags: [transportation,transit]
layout: post

image1:
  path: /images/2015/boardings.png
  text-below: Figure 1. Transit boardings

image2:
  path: /images/2015/mode-table.png
  text-above: Table 1. Boardings by Mode

image3:
  path: /images/2015/rail.png
  text-below: Figure 2. Regional Rail Boardings


---

### TRANSIT BOARDINGS ARE AT ALL-TIME LEVELS AND KEEP ON CLIMBING.

{% include image.html image=page.image1 %}

#### Why do Transit Boardings matter?

Transit Boardings is a measure that demonstrates how many people are traveling about the region in our region’s transit system. The transit system includes bus, commuter rail, light rail, streetcar and vanpool. The number of boardings can have impacts on the amount of traffic on our roads and the amount of ozone and carbon dioxide emitted into our air. A goal of our integrated land use and transportation plans is to increase the number of travel options available to people and increase the amount of travel by modes other than the automobile.

#### What are Overall Transit Boarding trends in our Region?

Figure 1 shows the total annual transit boardings in the PSRC Region since 2006. Despite impacts to the overall level of transit service in the region, region wide transit ridership has grown steadily since 2010 and exceeded 185 million annual boardings in 2014. Overall annual regional transit boardings have increased by over 39M annual boardings since X, a 23% increase. Transit boardings have exceeded pre-recession levels despite fewer service hours in 2014 than 2010 which has lead to higher standing volumes on buses and trains. In 2014, 25% of all ST express bus trips had passengers standing.

#### How does the Service compare to 2006?
The Great Recession had immediate impacts on transit boardings that have now been erased but it continues to affect the amount of service provided to passengers. Despite regional boardings being up over 23% since 2006, overall transit service in 2014 is still slightly less than it was in 2008.. Transit fares have also been increased by all operators over this time period.

{% include image.html image=page.image2 %}

#### What about Rail?

Rail, which includes light rail, streetcar and commuter rail has grown in frequency and coverage since 2006 which has resulted in significant increases in rail boardings since 2006. In 2006, Tacoma Link Light Rail and Sounder were the only rail services in the region and carried about 2% of the region’s total transit boardings each day. In 2009, Central Link started service and by 2014 rail boardings make up almost 10% of all daily transit boardings in the region.

{% include image.html image=page.image3 %}

#### What are the Future Implications?

Increases in transit boardings are consistent with regional policy. As the population continues growing, it will be important to maintain transit service levels to meet an increasing demand on the system. Moving forward we will be reporting on transit crowding measures like passenger loads to understand how the system is working for all users.
