---
author: Billy Charlton
title: Ferry ridership is holding steady.
tags: [transportation,ferries]
image: /images/2015/ferries.png
layout: post
excerpt: "Boardings on the Washington State Ferry System have reduced slightly since 2006, with total annual boardings in 2014 of approximately 23.1 million. Ferry boardings have been growing since 2012."

image1:
  path: /images/2015/ferries.png
  text-below: Figure 1. Annual Boardings by Ferry Operator

---

### Ferry ridership is holding steady.

{% include image.html image=page.image1 %}

#### Why do Ferry Boardings matter?

Ferry Boardings count how many people are traveling on our region’s ferry system. The ferry system is an important access link to jobs, health care and recreation for citizens on both sides of the Puget Sound. The ferry system is also the only means of access to Vashon Island. There are currently four providers of ferry service in the region with county level service provided for passenger only service and the Washington State Ferries that serves both cars and walk on passengers.

#### What is the Overall Ferry trend in our Region?

Figure 1 shows the total annual ferry boardings in the PSRC Region since 2006. Washington State Ferries (WSF) carries the largest share of ferry traffic of all ferry providers. Over this period, boardings on the Washington State Ferry System have reduced slightly with total annual boardings in 2014 of approximately 23.1 million. The population of Kitsap County has grown the least since 2006 and is increasing in age quicker than the other three counties in the PSRC region, one reason why the boardings on the ferry have decreased over this time period. There have also been a variety of fare and service changes that have also played a role in the changes in the overall demand for ferry service provided by WSF. WSF has been experiencing a growth in ferry boardings since about 2012.

Ferry ridership on the county provided service has experienced strong growth since 2006, growing almost 70% County level operators have increased service frequency over this time period to meet the growing demand. A large part of this growth is on King County Ferry Division service to Vashon Island and West Seattle. Overall annual boardings topped 1.1m on county provided service in 2014.

#### What are the Future Implications?

Ferry routes will continue to connect the communities across the Puget Sound and are a critical link between people and the services they need. The more recent growth in both the supply and demand for passenger only ferry service will be important to understand as the region moves forward.

