---
author: Gary Simonson
title: "Driving: The Downward Trend Continues"
tags: [transportation,driving]
image: /images/2015/vmt.png
layout: post
excerpt: "The total vehicle miles traveled has remained fairly flat regionally since
	the	late 1990’s. This has occurred even though the region has grown by over 1.5 million people since 1980: because the daily miles driven <i>per person</i> has dropped to levels last seen in the late 1980’s."

image1:
  path: /images/2015/vmt.png
  text-below: Figure 1. Regional Vehicle Miles Traveled

---

### DRIVING: THE DOWNWARD TREND CONTINUES

{% include image.html image=page.image1 %}

#### Why do Vehicle Miles Traveled matter?

"Vehicle Miles Traveled" is a measure that demonstrates how much people are traveling about the region. The amount of vehicle miles traveled has impacts on the amount of traffic on our roads and the amount of ozone and carbon dioxide emitted into the air. A goal of our integrated land use and transportation plans is to increase the number of travel options available to people and to lower the amount of vehicle miles traveled by automobile. Reducing the amount of miles driven per capita is an integral part of the State’s Climate Change Policy and a key part of the Region’s Three-Part Climate Change Program.

#### What are Overall Vehicle Miles Traveled trends in our Region?

Figure 1 shows the total annual vehicle miles traveled in the PSRC Region as well as daily miles driven per person since 1980. The total vehicle miles traveled has remained fairly flat regionally since the late 1990’s. The daily miles driven per person have dropped to levels last seen in the late 1980’s. This has occurred even though the region has grown by over 1.5 million people since 1980.

* Regional miles driven decreased from 29.8B in 2006 to 29.6B in 2013 despite the population increasing by over 240K people (a 9% increase).
* Regional miles driven per person decreased from a peak of 24 miles per person in 1999 to 21.5 miles per day in 2013.

#### What are the Future Implications?

The drop in vehicle miles traveled is consistent with the outcome “Travel by alternatives to driving alone is increased”. As the population continues growing, it will be important to maintain reductions in the amount of vehicle miles traveled per person to maintain our air quality and traffic congestions goals.
