---
author: Gary Simonson
title: Wet and Slow January
tags: [transportation,delay]
image: /images/2016/delay1.png
excerpt: "Delay on our freeways increased 32% between January 2015 and January 2016."
layout: post

image1:
  path: /images/2016/delay1.png
  text-below: Figure 1. Vehicle Hours of Delay

image2:
  path: /images/2016/delay2.png
  text-below: Figure 2. Rain

image3:
  path: /images/2016/delay3.png
  text-below: Figure 3. I-405

---

### {{page.title}}

{% include image.html image=page.image1 %}

Did your trip to work in January seem even slower than usual? If so, you were not alone. Delay on our freeways increased 32% between January 2015 and January 2016. The increases were seen on all our freeways with the greatest change occurring on I-5 while congestion on I-405 increased the least (13%). In all, we spent an additional 211,000 hours in traffic over the 21 weekdays in January 2016.

#### What happened in 2016?

There are many things that factor into traffic congestion, but the biggest three in January 2016 were likely:

1. Construction closures on Hwy 99.
2. 53K jobs added over the past year.
3. Rain, rain and more rain!

{% include image.html image=page.image2 %}

Although each of these items likely led to our delay increase, it is very likely that Mother Nature had a big role in our congestion last month. It is estimated that approximately ½ of all congestion on our roadways is not related to how many people are trying to use them but is instead related to things that don’t happen every day – like collisions and vehicle breakdowns. Wet roadways can play a big part in the number of collisions that occur and thus can have a big impact on traffic congestion. In January 2016, over 70% of our weekdays had rain and over half of those had more than ¼” of rain.

#### What about I-405?

{% include image.html image=page.image3 %}

I-405 was unique compared to the other freeway corridors in January 2016 in that it had sections of the corridor that experienced increases in delay and others that had decreases in delay in 2016. Between Bellevue and Tukwila, the overall congestion on I-405 increased at a similar rate as many of the other freeways in the region. Between Bothell and Bellevue, the overall delay for all the freeway lanes decreased almost 60% compared to 2015 – the only large freeway corridor to see a reduction in delay in the region. North of Bothell, delays more than doubled between 2015 and 2016 – the largest percent increase for a corridor section in the region.
