---
author: Craig Helmann
title: "Rail Ridership Continues to Climb"
image: /images/2016/transit-march-1.png
excerpt: "Monthly boardings on Link Light Rail topped 1 million boardings in January 2016 — almost twice what the boardings were in January 2010."

tags: [transportation,transit]
layout: post

image1:
  path: /images/2016/transit-march-1.png
  text-below: Figure 1. Total Transit Boardings

image2:
  path: /images/2016/transit-march-2.png
  text-below: Figure 2. Bus Boardings

---

### {{page.title}}

{% include image.html image=page.image1 %}

Monthly boardings on Link Light Rail between SeaTac Airport and Downtown Seattle and Tacoma Link service between Tacoma Dome Station and Downtown Tacoma topped 1 million boardings in January 2016 – almost twice what the boardings were in January 2010. In all, January 2016 light rail boardings were 3.7% higher than January 2015.

Sound Transit’s Sounder Commuter Rail boardings also increased almost 4% between 2015 and 2016, increasing to over 325,000 monthly boardings in January 2016.

#### What about buses?

{% include image.html image=page.image2 %}

January boardings on our region’s buses were down about 1% in January 2016 compared with January 2015, but still more than 7% higher than they were in January 2010. Boardings were down on all our operators except one, Community Transit, who experienced growth of approximately 1.5% between January 2015 and January 2016. King County Metro boardings were down around 0.5% and the largest drops were on Pierce and Kitsap Transit. Kitsap Transit was the only operator who had a reduction in service hours in January 2016.

There are several things to keep in mind when looking at monthly data – and for transit a big one is how many work days there are in the month. January 2016 had 21 weekdays in it, January 2015 had 22. One day doesn’t sound like much, but it resulted in 4.5% fewer workdays being observed in the monthly data in 2016.  All things considered, bus boardings were flat in January 2016.

#### Why was Community Transit up?

The past several years of transit data have shown strong demand even when service hours have been down. One big difference for Community Transit this past January were service hours – up almost 10% in 2016. This increase reflects the re-addition of Sunday service to Community Transit that occurred in June 2015. This was the first of the additions for Community Transit – the first service increase related to the successful passage of the November 2015 ballot measure will go on-line in March 27th with even more service planned to come online in September 2016.

#### Coming up in April

In April we will see what ridership looked like in February - the last month of data before the University Link opening. It will also include one extra day of ridership with our Leap Year.
